# Studying the Effects of Obstructive sleep apnea on the gut ecosystem

Background: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common disorder characterized by episodic obstruction to breathing due to upper airway collapse during sleep. OSA has been associated with adverse cardiovascular  and metabolic outcomes,  although data regarding potential causal pathways are still evolving. 

Study Design: Because O2 and CO2 affect the ecology of the gut microbiota  and the microbiota has been shown to contribute to various cardio-metabolic disorders, we hypothesized that the downstream physiological consequences of OSA are linked to functional alterations in the gut ecosystem. Here, we model human OSA and its cardiovascular consequence using atherosclerosis-prone (Ldlr -/-) adult mice fed high-fat diet (resembling western dietary practices). As episodic hypoxia and hypercapnia mimic the changes in blood gases that occur in OSA, these mice were longitudinally exposed to intermittent hypoxia and hypercapnia (IHH; analogous to chronic OSA) in a computer-controlled atmosphere chamber system (treatment group; n=8) or housed in room air (control group; n=8), and examined for 6 weeks. We had previously shown that IHH exacerbates atherosclerosis plaque formation in this model system. 

Methods: Fecal samples, a representative of the gut ecosystem, were collected at baseline and twice each week thereafter, and microbiome and metabolome were profiled using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and LC-MS/MS-based untargeted mass-spectrometry, respectively. We estimated relative abundances of microbial features (using QIIME2) and molecular features (using GNPS and MZmine2) per sample and compared OSA-mimicking and control mice using multivariate statistical models. 

Results: Starting from a highly congruent gut composition at baseline, both microbiome and metabolome of IHH-exposed mice cumulatively diverged from controls and co-varied with increasing duration of IHH-exposure.  We noted significant compositional changes in both microbial (>10%, mostly increases in Clostridia) and molecular (>22%) species in the gut. Furthermore, top molecules altered in abundance included microbe-derived secondary bile acids, enterolignans and fatty acids (identified to the highest level of annotation per metabolomics standards), highlighting the impact of IHH on host-commensal co-metabolism in the gut. Thus, we present the first evidence that IHH functionally perturbs the gut ecosystem, setting the stage for understanding its involvement in associated cardio-metabolic disorders.

